[[bj:BioJava|BioJava]] provides object relational mapping (ORM) to BioSQL 1.0 using [http://www.hibernate.org  Hibernate] bindings to objects in the <code>org.biojavax</code> packages.

=BioJavaX Design=
[bj:BioJavaX|BioJavaXDocs]] was officially released with BioJava1.5. It extends the <code>org.biojava</code> API's and was designed to very closely match the BioSQL schema. This made ORM of [[bj:BioJava|BioJava]] to BioSQL much more straight forward and brought the BioJava object model much closer to that used by [[bp:BioPerl|BioPerl]].

=Hibernate Mapping=
[http://www.hibernate.org Hibernate] is currently used as the ORM provider for BioJava. Mapping is defined using xml config files. These files formally define where objects are written in the database.

Hibernate mappings are currently defined for the following RDBMS's:
* [http://code.open-bio.org/svnweb/index.cgi/biojava/browse/biojava-live/trunk/src/org/biojavax/bio/db/biosql/pg PostGres]
* [http://code.open-bio.org/svnweb/index.cgi/biojava/browse/biojava-live/trunk/src/org/biojavax/bio/db/biosql/oracle Oracle]
* [http://code.open-bio.org/svnweb/index.cgi/biojava/browse/biojava-live/trunk/src/org/biojavax/bio/db/biosql/mysql MySQL]
* [http://code.open-bio.org/svnweb/index.cgi/biojava/browse/biojava-live/trunk/src/org/biojavax/bio/db/biosql/hsqldb HyperSonic]
* Derby (comming soon)

=JPA and Annotations=
In the near future it would be desirable to update BioJava to make use of JPA and Annotations to define entity mappings. This would offer several advantages.
# It would be possible to define a JPA entity manager which would not need to know which ORM system is being used. Currently we are limited to Hibernate.
# Annotations could be used in classes that form entities removing the need for XML configuration.
# If XML configuration is prefered then there would not be a need for one per RDBMS.


=Legacy Mapping=
BioJava does contain a legacy mapping to the Singapore release of the BioSQL Schema. This is outdated, buggy, deprecated and not maintained. We retain it only for backwards compatability and reserve the right to drop this support at any time in the future. The mapping is not compatable with any other Bio* project. We strongly advise against using it.