==BioSQL release v1.0.1==

This is an update release of the v1.0 core BioSQL schema (code-named Tokyo), not including recent extensions.

===Release schedule===

Note: open questions are in ''italics.'' If you have thoughts or feedback on any of the below, please email them to biosql-l&#64;lists&#46;open-bio&#46;org.

# Update INSTALL file
#* Fix inconsistencies in naming of the BioSQL database instance (here and with Bioperl-db). Will name it simply biosql from now on.
#* Add note about current incompatibility with PostgreSQL v8.3+.
# Implement scheduled changes
#* Widen column width constraint of dbxref.accession and correspondingly bioentry.accession. Will use 128 chars for now.
#* Add migration scripts at least for Pg, MySQL, and Oracle. 
# Update Changes file.
# Merge changes to biosql-release-1-0 branch. 
# Write release announcement. 
# Tag release with biosql-rel-1.0.1
# Package BioSQL for release, upload to download site (http://biosql.org/DIST)
# Release:
#* Add download and release link to wiki on front page.
#* Post announcement to biosql-l and news.open-bio.org.

==BioSQL release v1.0.0==

This is a release of the core BioSQL schema, not including recent extensions.

===Release schedule===

Note: open questions are in ''italics.'' If you have thoughts or feedback on any of the below, please email them to biosql-l&#64;lists&#46;open-bio&#46;org.

# Update license for BioSQL and all its DDL and software scripts. ''Done. This is now the LGPL license for all schema files. --[[User%3AHlapp|Hilmar]] 20:23, 21 February 2008 (EST)''
#* The current license refers to the 'same terms as Perl' and the Perl Artistic Licence. Not only does Perl now dual-license under Artistic License v2.0 or GPL (because the original Perl Artistic License v1.0 has problems), but also there isn't a good reason to tie the BioSQL license to that of Perl.
# Update, fix, or remove various ancillary files that don't seem to have been touched in a long time.
#* biosql-accelerators-pg.sql ''Updated/fixed, and now also retired. --[[User%3AHlapp|Hilmar]] 23:40, 22 February 2008 (EST)''
#* biosqldb-views-pg.sql ''Done. --[[User%3AHlapp|Hilmar]] 20:31, 21 February 2008 (EST)''
# Rename biosql-ora to biosqldb-ora for consistency with the other schema versions ''Done. --[[User%3AHlapp|Hilmar]] 20:31, 21 February 2008 (EST)''
# Regenerate HTML documentation from schema DDL (using sqlt) ''Doesn't work, sqlt seems to be broken at present. --[[User%3AHlapp|Hilmar]] 21:11, 21 February 2008 (EST)''
# Update Changes file. ''Done. --[[User%3AHlapp|Hilmar]] 23:41, 22 February 2008 (EST)''
# Update documentation in the repository. ''Done, for [http://code.open-bio.org/svnweb/index.cgi/biosql/browse/biosql-schema/trunk/doc/biopython Biopython] (see [http://code.open-bio.org/svnweb/index.cgi/biosql/checkout/biosql-schema/trunk/doc/biopython/python_biosql_basic.pdf PDF]) and [http://code.open-bio.org/svnweb/index.cgi/biosql/checkout/biosql-schema/trunk/doc/bj_and_bsql_oracle_howto.htm BioJava/Oracle]. Unfortunately, realized this not before, but only after branching off, so need to merge all changes to the branch. --[[User%3AHlapp|Hilmar]] 12:06, 24 February 2008 (EST)''
# Create biosql-release-1-0 branch. ''Done. --[[User%3AHlapp|Hilmar]] 23:43, 22 February 2008 (EST)'' 
# Remove from biosql-release-1-0 branch all schema modules or versions and all scripts that aren't release-ready yet, or are not yet or no longer supported. ''Done. --[[User%3AHlapp|Hilmar]] 23:43, 22 February 2008 (EST)''
#* This includes the following:
#** phylodb module DDLs
#** phylodb ERD
#** phy* scripts (depend on phylodb, and not up-to-date)
#** load_itis_taxonomy.pl, tree-precompute.pl scripts (depend on phylodb, and not up-to-date)
#** phylodb-topo-queries.sql (depends on phylodb)
#* ''Can the HSQLDB version be tested by anyone for syntactic correctness and compatibility with a current revision of HSQLDB?''
# Write release announcement. ''Done. --[[User%3AHlapp|Hilmar]] 10:52, 5 March 2008 (EST)''
# Tag release with biosql-rel-1.0.0 ''Done. --[[User%3AHlapp|Hilmar]] 10:53, 5 March 2008 (EST)''
# Package BioSQL for release, upload to download site (http://biosql.org/DIST) ''Done, with MD5 signatures. --[[User%3AHlapp|Hilmar]] 17:07, 6 March 2008 (EST)''
# Release: ''Done. --[[User%3AHlapp|Hilmar]] 22:02, 6 March 2008 (EST)''
#* Add download and release link to wiki on front page (also add Downloads page ot sidebar).
#* Post announcement to biosql-l and news.open-bio.org.